[Music]
Queen Victoria was one of the greatest
British monarchs of all time she ruled
for 63 long years and became the longest
reigning British monarch at least before
elizabeth ii came along but at the
beginning of her reign nobody believed
it would come to any good because her
coronation was a disaster
she became queen in June of 1837 when
she was just 18 years old
traditionally British monarchs were
coordinated months after they started to
rule their country so when a date was
set for the ceremony in June 1838 a
little over a year had passed since he
actually came to the throne
unfortunately that didn't mean they used
all this time to arrange the service in
fact preparations didn't begin until
March 1838 if you look at it this way
the catastrophe had all turned into
wasn't particularly shocking but I'm
getting ahead of myself here the date
was set for Thursday June 28th 1838
people were excited to welcome their new
queen since the ceremony was held in
London hundreds of visitors started
arriving there days before the crowning
huge celebrations were planned in all
parts of the city
and of course everyone wanted to get a
glimpse of Her Majesty on the big day
about 400,000 people from all over the
country came to the Capitol they flooded
parks and streets mostly along the route
of the public procession the young
sovereign was going to make it all the
way from Buckingham Palace where she
lived to Westminster Abbey where this
magnificent event had taken place since
1066 at 10:00 that morning Victoria got
into the gold state coach which by the
way the royal family still uses today on
special occasions it must have been
quite a ride because the carriage was
pretty old and uncomfortable but one
look at the cheering crowd made up for
all the trouble
scaffolding was built all over the
streets and her loyal subjects occupied
every visible spot by the row
men and women dressed in their best
clothes waved their handkerchiefs and
saluted the Queen there were so many
people there
she was actually worried they would hurt
each other in the rush it took her more
than an hour to get to the Abbey but
despite all the fuss everything was
going rather smoothly until the real
ceremony started you'd probably think
what could be more important for the
Empire than the coronation of a new
monarch but the surprising truth is that
there was almost no rehearsal for it as
a result well let's say things didn't
quite go as planned it seemed like the
best prepared person there was actually
19 year old Victoria unlike many other
parties involved she'd been to
Westminster the day before the ritual so
she knew how to act at least at some
points but when she didn't there was
almost no one to guide her witnesses
recall that only a few men seemed to
know what they were doing while others
carried out their tasks with a continual
difficulty and embarrassment after they
made the Queen leave her chair to early
confused Victoria asked one of the Lords
pray tell me what I am to do for they
don't know the Archbishop of Canterbury
played a crucial role in the ceremony
since he was the one who put the crown
on the sovereigns head and even his
performance wasn't without mistakes
the craziest thing and definitely the
most painful for Victoria happened when
it was time for her to wear the
coronation ring normally it goes on the
monarchs ring finger so nothing unusual
here but when the archbishop tried to
put it on it seemed too small
apparently the Goldsmith's mistakenly
made it for her little finger but the
archbishop didn't know that after all it
was an ancient custom so he forced the
ring on her fourth finger anyway causing
her a lot of pain
it was almost impossible to take off
later so poor Victoria had to hold her
hand in ice-cold water
but all that suffering paid off right at
least she was declared queen after all
well there was a catch the Bishop of
Bath and wells who was making sure that
all went according to plan
accidentally missed two pages of the
order of service and that of course was
the section where the Monarchs title was
proclaimed in other words the whole
ceremony was basically invalid so
Victoria had to return to the church to
do everything properly luckily the other
incidents were far less critical but
equally absurd
for instance Her Majesty was given the
orb at the wrong time and it was pretty
heavy for a young girl the music at the
ceremony was an oversight to the
composer who was hired to write a new
anthem for the service passed away three
months before the coronation and his
work was never finished
in the end just a single piece was
created for the event the accompaniment
lacked integrity and could have been
much better the conductor
Sir George smart didn't help either for
some reason he chose to play the organ
himself and supervise the other
musicians at the same time I think you
can get the picture the orchestra was
poorly coordinated the high point of
this ludicrous day came when the piers
were paying their homage to the new
Queen one of them was aptly named Lord
John Rahl the Honourable member of
parliament was already in his 80s at the
time and wasn't frankly in the best
shape it was an enforcement irony that
when the Lord tried to climb the stairs
to the throne he simply fell and rolled
down the steps it didn't seem to hurt
him though so he made an attempt to
approach the Queen again as if nothing
happened
that's when Victoria proved herself to
be a thoughtful and kind ruler she
quickly got up and came down to Rahl
so he didn't have to repeat his
dangerous trick this gesture made many
of those who were present there adore
her and the diarist
described it as the remarkable union of
naivete
good nature with propriety and dignity
but other people just couldn't help
themselves and Lord Rahl became the
character of jokes and humorous poems
and if that wasn't enough near the end
the whole spectacle the treasurer of the
household tried to cheer up the noble
guests of the church by throwing some
coronation metals into the crowd just
imagine the mess it cost the aldermen
judges and maids of honor fighting each
other for a piece of metal a son of the
Duke of Richmond was particularly
successful since he managed to grab no
less than 12 souvenirs well at least
they got something out of it if you
think the lords and bishops were just
overwhelmed under all the stress there's
some truth to that and actually they had
some time to regain their strength at
times when there was no need for the
Queen and her companions to be at the
main altar they escaped to st. Edward's
Chappell Chappell was a strong word for
it though Victoria later described it an
altar was covered with sandwiches and
drinks well as her friend and prime
minister Lord Melbourne put it wherever
the clergy had anything to do with
anything
they're sure to be plenty to eat the
ceremony lasted five excruciating hours
and eventually there was hardly anyone
in Westminster who wasn't relieved it
was over
historians dubbed it the last of the
botched coronations because after that a
new program was formed to prevent
history from repeating itself as for the
woman of the hour
she passed this challenging test with
patience and dignity far greater than
anyone expected
surprisingly Victoria loved the service
with all its faults and flaws and called
that day the proudest of her life so
what was your favorite part of this
story let me know down in the comments
if you learned something new today then
give this video a like and share it with
a friend
but hey don't go off wearing your crown
just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life